# General IRC Networks

_Selected networks with several hundred to several thousand users_

* * *

updated Mar 15, 2003

This page is part of the [IRChelp.org Networks
Site](http://www.irchelp.org/irchelp/networks/), please do not mirror or
distribute.

We've set up separate pages to highlight some of the [most
popular](popular.html) nets (with over 10,000 people), or those serving a
special [local region](local.html) or [subject area](subject.html). That still
leaves hundreds of general networks. If you really want a full list, check out
the [netsplit.de](http://irc.netsplit.de/networks/) 3rd party statistics site
[ext. link]. We highlight just a few of these small to medium networks below.
They are not necessarily the best or biggest nets. We just want to give you
some suggestions if you're new to IRC and looking for a general chat network.
If you're fed up with the chaos of the [popular nets](popular.html), many of
these nets have full services and can be a reasonable place for you to either
start or move your channel. Networks are listed alphabetically.

**Network**
**Data**

* * *

* * *

[AUSTnet](http://www.austnet.org/)

Servers mainly around the pacific. Unlike most large networks, this is one of
the few that isn't US-based, but predominantly australasian. North American
all-nighters might find some signs of friendly life here.

Locations: Australia, Canada, Singapore, UK, USA

Default ports: 6667-6669

Services: Channel (ChanOP), Nick (NickOP), Note (NoteOP), Help (HelpOP)

Started: Early 1996

Administrative channel: #asd

[Server list](http://www.austnet.org/servers/index.html)

* * *

* * *

[ChatNet](http://www.chatnet.org/)

Locations: Canada, Norway, Portugal, South Africa, Turkey, UK, USA

Services: Channel (K9)

Started: March 1996

Administrative channel: #nuthouse

[Server list](http://www.chatnet.org/Servers.html).

* * *

* * *

[MSN](http://communities.msn.com/people/)

Microsoft's own chat system, based on something called the Microsoft Exchange
Chat Service. Formerly IRC- and web-based, as of May 2001, they require you to
use their web link, which will prompt you to download their special client.
Since you cannot connect to this network using a standard IRC client, we will
no longer provide information on it, beyond simply pointing you to their own
web site.

* * *

* * *

[NewNet](http://www.newnet.net/)

Originally formed by the irc.eskimo.com server after being forced off EFnet,
this network soon became a prime example of how a small network grows to a
respectable size and maintains stability for a number of years.

Locations: Canada, France, Germany, New Zealand, UK, USA

Services: Channel (ChanServ), Nick (NickServ)

Started: April 1996

Administrative channel: #idleland

[Server list](http://www.newnet.net/serverlist.php).

* * *

* * *

[RelicNet](http://www.relic.net/)

Locations: Australia, Belgium, Canada, UK, USA

Services: Channel (ChanS), Nick (NickS), Memo (MemoS), others.

Started: October 1997

Administrative channel: #relicnet

[Server list](http://www.relic.net/servers.htm)

* * *

* * *

[Talk City](http://www.talkcity.com/)

This is another large IRC/web-based chat network that has become unreasonably
restrictive. As of April 2000, TalkCity required the use of specially modified
versions of IRC clients such as mIRC for Windows, Ircle for Mac, etc. This was
ostensibly to prevent abuse from people who were using customized "war
scripts" to attack other users. Not surprisingly, the modified clients also
came with annoying streaming ads, so you decide for yourself what their true
intention was. Since this network can no longer be reached using standard IRC
clients, we will no longer provide information on it, beyond simply pointing
you to their own web site.

* * *

* * *

[WebNet](http://www.webchat.org/)

A network formerly run entirely on Windows servers, which was a great novelty
back then, this network has developed into a very decent alternative to the
major ones. Showcase for the (commercial) Conference Room ircd.

Locations: Canada, Hong Kong, Thailand, USA

Default port: 7000

Services: Channel (ChanServ), Nick (NickServ), Memo (MemoServ)

Administrative channel: #spiderslair

[Server list](http://www.webchat.org/servers.html)

* * *

* * *

[ [networks home](./) | [popular nets](popular.html) | general nets | [subject
nets](subject.html) | [local nets](local.html) ]

* * *

![-navigational bar-](/irchelp/Pix/ihnavbar.gif)

[ [go back](/irchelp/) | [search](/irchelp/search_engine.cgi) |
[help](/irchelp/help.html) | [send email](/irchelp/mail.cgi) ]

[all pages (C) IRCHELP.ORG or original authors](/irchelp/credit.html)

