The 'winhelper' mIRC Takeover Trojan

by Melinda Thompson aka habit <ima@badhabit.org>
original version at <http://www.irchelp.org/irchelp/mirc/trojan.txt>
Greek translation at <http://w4u.eexi.gr/~shadow/irc/trojan.txt>

updated 1/17/98

WHAT IS IT?

Starting around Jan 10, 1998, many users of the mIRC IRC client for
Windows have suffered from channel takeovers as the result of a new
trojan horse program (a file that pretends to be something good when
it's really not). Once infected, the client can be forced to
do any or all of the following:
	1. invite an evil-doer to any channel where you are an operator,
	2. mass deop all the other ops, 
	3. op the evil-doer
	4. deop or quit IRC yourself
These result in a de facto takeover which does not require
exploiting the server timestamp (TS), splits, or any other hacks.

HOW DID I GET INFECTED?

The exploit is purposefully named like something that might be
desirable, such as a screensaver, a crack, or some other .exe file.
(Examples include spoof.exe, land.exe, etc.) You can get it within
IRC using DCC get, or you might download it by WWW or FTP. No matter
what, you need to actively get it from somewhere or somebody (unless
you foolishly have mIRC's auto dcc get turned on, in which case
anybody can send you anything at any time).

When you attempt to run the trojan it is designed to give an error
message or appear to have been a failed transfer, while actually
altering win.ini and writing 2 other files. You probably assume the
transfer corrupted the file and either throw the original away or
just give up on it. However by this time the exploit is already
installed. The fake mIRC.ini file is put at root level on the
startup drive (C: \ usually) and evidently thru this higher level
location the fake ini file is loaded rather than the correct ini
file which is in the mirc subdirectory.

HOW DOES IT WORK?

The evil-doers hang out on a designated special channel and wait for
signs that you are infected. You will /notice the control channel
when you join IRC, nick change, and likely when you become a chanop.
The evil-doers then come to your channel and force you to turn the
channel over to them (see 4 steps above). Commands to the infected
are done by /msg !<command> which the script blocks you from seeing.
 So you hand over the channel, all without ever seeing that they are
being msg'd with these commands.

WHAT IS THE CURE?

The cure is as follows: remove the file winhelper.exe, the C:\
version of mIRC.ini and delete a line from win.ini that references
winhelper.exe... in other words, a line in win.ini that says
something about running c:\windows\system\winhelper.exe, or perhaps:
run=C:\windows\winhelper.exe. Not sure of the exact format/location
of the line in win.ini but it definitely refers to the file
winhelper.exe.

There are many variants of the original trojan now but they tend to
act the same way: by creating or modifying default startup files
such as mirc.ini, win.ini, or script.ini.

MORAL OF THE STORY

*NEVER* download files (by DCC, WWW, FTP, or other ways) from a
person or a web site that you are not familiar with, no matter how
enticing or normal the files seem to be. There are far too many
lamers out there who are eager to take advantage of you, and the
consequences can range from the relatively harmless, like IRC
takeovers, to the relatively dangerous, like having your hard disk
accessed/erased, your login compromised, or worse. See for example:
	http://www.irchelp.org/irchelp/mirc/si.html
for another popular trojan horse for mIRC. This is not a scare
tactic - these things really do happen every day!
